[WIND BLOWING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[WATER RUNNING]
>> 6.8 miles from the Nile, near
the modern Egyptian town of El
Araba El Madfuna, is the
remnants of the oldest Egyptian
city called Abdu, renamed
by the Greeks and referred
to in English as Abydos.
This was a site of many
ancient temples including
Seti I and a mysterious
kings list dating back
thousands of years.
A royal necropolis where
early pharaohs were entombed
was also found here, suggesting
that this area was extremely
significant in burials, leading
to the growth of the town's
importance as a cult
site for Osiris.
But what was so important
here at this area?
Experts keep
digging up evidence.
In November of 2016, Egypt
announced the remains
of a lost city alongside
the mortuary temple
of Seti I. A team
of archaeologists
from the Egyptian
Ministry of Antiquities
found the remains of
ancient huts and graves
during a dig dating
back to 7,000 years ago.
Some believe, however, that
the significance of this
find is just the beginning
of not only the dating
of this ancient city, but
also its significant meaning
in the world.
What lies below the surface
of this temple complex
may unravel a very old story.
>> But this was essentially
just the beginning.
We know that there have
been a series of quite
extraordinary discoveries
made at Abydos, including
these huge boats
which were discovered
within the cemeteries there.
And what is very clear is that
Abydos was seen as the point
that you would pick up this
road that would take you
into the afterlife, a
road that would initially
go towards the west, towards the
direction of the setting sun.
Abydos was arguably
the most important
of all of these cemeteries in
Egypt, and that this tradition
they continued on right the
way through the Old Kingdom
into the New Kingdom
period when you
have this massive, great
temple complex built
by Seti I around 1300 BC.
And this is an
incredibly large temple.
As you approach it, you see
these 12 incredibly massive,
colossal pillars--
6 on either side of
this gigantic entrance.
And you go into this, and it's
like being in a giant's palace,
basically.
But you pass through
this, you pass
through all of the
different chapels,
and you eventually
break your channel
through into this corridor.
And in this corridor, right
the way across all of the wall
is all of the kings
that ruled not
just during the
Dynastic period up
to this point, the
time of Seti I,
but also it includes details
of the time of the gods,
the time of the demigods,
going all the way
back to the time of Zep Tepi--
the first time.
>> It's one of the most
mysterious temple complexes
found anywhere in Egypt,
anywhere in the world.
We don't know for sure
who built this complex.
how long it's been there.
It is called the
Abydos Temple Complex,
but it actually encompasses
two very, very different sites.
One of them is very
visible to the naked eye,
and this is the Seti I temple,
which is very contemporary even
in modern terms.
If you look at
this temple today,
the architecture
is just exquisite.
It is beautifully,
beautifully laid out.
And it appears that
this site is built
on top of an even older, more
mysterious site of very, very
different architecture that
is called the Osireion.
The nature of the construction
and the apparent dating
of that site is
contemporary of what
we find on the Giza Plateau.
The legacy that was
left to us today
is simply the technology,
the extraordinary technology,
and the precision of creating
these structures in the places
where we find them today.
Now, while the Sphinx itself
was carved from native stone,
the Osireion
appears to have been
created from the granite coming
in from the Aswan quarries.
And the way that these
structures are situated
suggests a dating contemporary
with the Giza Plateau.
We're talking right at the
end of the last Ice Age.
The Ice Age ended
about 12,000 years
before present, the unsettled
weather pattern for 4,000 years
after that.
So we're talking 10,000 to
12,000 BP, before present,
as very likely frames for
the building of the Abydos
Complex itself.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Officially, Egyptian history
begins in 3100 to 3200 BC.
The fact that a city
was found in Abydos
that dates from
approximately 7,000 years ago
shows how old the site is.
It's important to remember that
Abydos is the site of Osiris.
He lived in Abydos, home of
his main temple, the Osireion.
Osiris died around the time of
the last great flood, a.k.a.
10,000 years ago.
So finding a 7,000-year-old city
in this location reveals how
ancient the site truly is.
It is very likely that the
city was found 400 meters away
from Seti I's temple.
It probably belonged to the
Shemsis, Osiris followers,
otherwise known as the
watching angels in the Bible.
Egyptian funerary texts tell
us that Osiris lived there
with his Shemsis, his entourage.
>> This mysterious temple
complex called the Osireion is
built at such a level
that it fills with water.
Could this be an ancient
technology dating back
to 10,000 years ago?
Matias de Stefano explains
that the technology presented
in this subterranean
Osireion temple
connects back to Atlantis.
>> This temple has been built
as the point of connection.
What people in
Atlantean times did
was to use water as a way
of bringing information.
So they would storage
information in the water.
And in that way, they would
also transmit the information
through the blood by the bath,
like many other cultures did.
So this temple was about to put
heaven and Earth both together
in the blood of
people so they could
have the information of both
parts of the reality as one.
And of course, as
the pyramids, the way
of building it was to bring the
stones from far away buy sound.
The technology was the sound.
So all the structure
was about how
to bring the information of
the cosmos into the blood,
into the cells by
vibration, by sound.
So this is why this is the
first place in history where
you find the flower of life.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> In my opinion, there is
an irrefutable link between
the Osireion and Atlantis.
The Edfu texts that mention
Atlantis speak of a temple
called the Buenem,
which translates
to the Place of the Cistern.
This corresponds
exactly to the Osireion.
In my opinion, the Buenem is
the prototype of the Osireion.
It must have been the
same type of structure
in both Atlantis and Abydos.
>> If the Osireion temple
connects back to Atlantis,
then is it possible that
Osiris himself connects back
to Atlantis?
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Since 2007, I've been working
on an important thesis which
explains that Osiris is the God
found known as Enki at Sumer.
They are one in the same.
Sumerian texts
constantly refer to Enki
welcoming nobles and commoners
in his aquatic temple.
Numerous Sumerian
and Akkadian seals
show Enki in a
structure with columns
and surrounded by water.
It is clear that it is
the Osireion temple.
In my opinion, Enki and
Osiris are one in the same.
He was Enki, Lord of the
Earth to the Sumerians
in Asar, his true Egyptian name.
And Osiris is the Greek
one to the Egyptians.
He lived for a long time
in the Osireion temple,
where he welcomed his people
and preached the good word.
Both Enki in Sumer and Osiris in
Egypt were close to the people
and taught them.
Enki in Sumer is the
famous biblical serpent.
Certain tablets refer
to him as the serpent.
An important element linked
to both Abydos and my theory
that Enki is Osiris
is that Enki regularly
lived in an aquatic
temple known as Abzu,
according to Sumerian texts.
The site of Abydos is
pronounced Abdu in Egyptian,
which means the reliquary hill.
Why hill?
We know there was a hill over
the Osireion temple on which
grew trees.
When does Enki become Osiris?
The Sumerian tablets
mentioned Enki
with Annungo, his
entourage, who will become
the Shemsis in Egypt and the
Anunna, Enlil's followers
or sets in Egypt.
At first, Enki is very present.
Many tablets explain that he
came to Earth with the gods
and that he settles in
the Kharsag Mountains
and creates the
garden known as Eden.
But it is obvious in
the Sumerian texts
that Enki does not get
along with the Anunna.
Enki eventually
leaves the Anunna clan
and goes to live in
the Atlantean Islands
and in Egypt, which is
where he settles and creates
his site at Abydos.
This is where he officially
becomes Asar, or Osiris.
>> Osiris was one of the main
gods of Egyptian culture,
related, of course,
to the main trinity,
which was with Isis and Horus.
And the history of
them is something
that is more related
with the first pharaohs
and the first lineage of the
kings and queens of this land
and how they
started to resurrect
by mummification and so on.
So it's kind of the god of the
afterlife of the mummification.
But that's the Egyptian
point of view of history.
But its history comes way
before and way beyond in time,
and it's more related with
the families of Atlantis
that came to this land around
12,000 to 11,000 years ago.
So during that period of time
when the civilization ended,
they came here.
So one of the
first families that
came to make the
settlements here
was the family of Osiris, which
of course, was not his name.
>> So there appears to be
a link between the Osireion
and the cult of Enki in Sumeria.
And this comes from the
fact that the main temple
of Enki at Eridu, in what
is today southern Iran,
involved the creation
of a structure
where the waters
of the Euphrates
would come in and flood the
lower levels exactly the same
as the Osireion at Abydos.
And although we know that the
Osireion quite clearly was
associated with
the cult of Osiris,
and what was going on in Sumeria
was connected with the god
Enki, we have to ask ourselves
whether there is a relationship
between these two gods.
>> Could the Sumerian Enki
actually be the same person
referred to in Egypt as Osiris?
If this is so, could he have
lived on the Atlantean Islands
and then colonized a
settlement in Egypt
referred to now as Abydos?
Experts point to
a famous road that
could have been where
the followers of Osiris
traveled from the coast
of Africa to Abydos.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> In the fifth century BC,
with the help of Egyptian texts,
Herodotus set out to
map the route taken
by Osiris's followers after the
flood which destroyed Atlantis.
Egyptians were very familiar
with the story of Atlantis
as it is told in great detail on
the walls of the Edfu temples.
He went from the
Pillars of Hercules
to Mount Atlas, then mapped
out the route known today
as the Path of the
Dead to Libyan desert,
to Thebes and Abydos,
and probably Dendera.
It's very interesting
to see that Herodotus
was able to recreate
this route which
contemporary archaeologists
are quite familiar with,
since there are traces
throughout the Libyan desert
of this road that has
since become a trade route.
>> Atlantis was a civilization
settled all around the islands
in the Atlantic Ocean, around
the islands of Green Cape,
of Canary Islands, and Azores.
The Canary Islands were of
the most important place
through where they started
to spread around the world.
And they took different
path to get to the Nile,
because the Nile was their goal.
And from the Canary
Islands is where
they took the path
to something that we
called at that time Taggok.
And Taggok was what
we call now Iberia.
And they had the white
pass and the black pass,
and the white pass
was the northern
and the black path
was the southern.
That is Morocco today,
all the Atlas Mountains.
And through the South, they
went through the fertile valleys
in all the Sahara.
In that time there was no
Sahara as we know it today.
There was more green regions.
So they crossed all
through that region
until they reached by the
north the delta of the Nile,
and by the South, they reached
the center of the Nile,
where now you can find Abydos.
>> If this is true, where can
we find in the texts evidence
of this ancient
Osiris Enki clan?
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> My theory is that the
southern part of Atlantis was
in the Canary Islands and
extended north to the Azores
Islands.
Atlantis was disrupted
several times.
There were numerous floods, as
mentioned in the Edfu texts.
Atlanteans regularly
faced major problems
and were constantly
forced to rebuild.
In my view, the southern
part corresponds
to the Canary Islands which
comes from the Latin Canariae
Insulae, the Island of
Dogs, not because dogs
were rampant on the island
when it was discovered,
but because ancient legends tell
of humans with dog heads living
there.
Again, we find the idea
that Osiris's followers,
the Shemsis, were present in
the southern part of Atlantis.
One of his epithets
was Khenti-Amentiu,
the foremost of Westerners,
who has a wolf head.
He is the first follower
to bring Western culture,
Atlantis, to Egypt.
Anubis also has a
wolf head and happens
to be one of Osiris's sons.
After his father's death, he
becomes a kind of funerary God.
He was also connected to
Osiris through his wolf head.
>> If ancient texts depict
the followers of Osiris
and their connection
to Atlantis,
where might we find evidence
that the wife or sister
of Osiris was also
connected to Atlantis?
Experts point to the
symbol of the cow horns.
>> Isis is the answer.
Close to the temple of
Abydos in southern Egypt
is another beautiful
temple, that of Dendera.
And the main patron
deity there is Hathor.
She is the cow goddess.
But in addition to
this, it is also
said to be the birthplace
of the goddess Isis.
In fact, there is actually
a special building
that you can visit to
this day that's said
to be the very spot that
the goddess Isis was born.
And of course, Isis was
the sister of Osiris,
and Osiris was the
main god of Abydos.
So there was a relationship
between these two cult centers,
one associated with Isis,
and the other associated
with her brother Osiris.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> In the "Critias," Plato
explains that the Atlantean
culture is linked to cow horns.
Interestingly, cows
dominate the site
of Dendera, which is
intimately linked to Isis.
In the Temple of
Ramesses II at Abydos
is a representation of the royal
pike adorned with cow horns.
It is a very ancient
cult. Stone braziers
in the shape of cow horns
are also found in Egypt.
Cow horns are a distinctive
symbol related to Atlantis,
as explained by Plato.
It's fascinating to
find these elements
both at Abydos and Dendera.
>> Abydos might have been
the home of the god Osiris,
but it is known today as the
home of the cult of Osiris.
Anton explains that
the cult of Osiris
didn't happen till
after his death,
and his death plays
a significant role
in our history and
understanding of existence
here on this planet.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> The cult of Osiris before
his death is simply meeting with
a God and following
his teachings.
After his death at
Abydos 10,000 years ago,
close to the Osireion
temple, an annual celebration
is held to honor his death
and bring him back to life.
>> Abydos was one of the most
ancient centers of worship
of the God Osiris.
Why?
Osiris was the god of
the dead, the dead god
that the pharaoh became
in death, obviously.
But it was more than this,
because before even Osiris was
associated with Abydos,
it was the place
of the cult of another God by
the name of Khenti-Amentiu.
And this was a dog in a canine
form, most obviously a jackal.
And this jackal was seen
to be the guide of the soul
as it journeyed through the
underworld into the afterlife.
And eventually,
Khenti-Amentiu became
a part of the cult of Osiris.
Once you have passed through
the magnificent temple
of Seti I at Abydos, you come
out into an open courtyard.
And if you then
look down, you see
this incredible
underground structure,
and it is made of
massive cyclopian blocks.
Now, these are huge blocks
that almost look as if they've
been put in place by giants.
And this forms a
rectilinear structure
in the center of which is a
raised platform or island.
And this would have been
surrounded in the past
by water that would have
flowed in from the Nile.
And within the island itself
is these massive pillars
that had these lintels
on top of them.
And the whole thing was
covered over with a roof
and quite clearly was used
for rituals and initiations,
probably to do with the
cult of the god Osiris.
Why Osiris?
Well, because according to
the most ancient versions
of the story of his
death, he was buried
on an island within a tomb.
And so what the
Osireion represents
is a symbolic tomb
of the god Osiris.
And the rituals to do
with the cult of Osiris
would have been conducted at
this location right the way
through Dynastic times.
>> If the cult was
based on his death,
what story has been told
here for many years?
>> The story of Osiris is
a very fascinating one,
and it tells of the betrayal
of this God by his brother Set
or Seth, who is
the trickster God.
And it was said that
he tricked Osiris
into a tailor-made coffin which
was then nailed down and thrown
into the River Nile.
And of course,
this killed Osiris.
But his sister and wife, Isis,
came along, found the body,
and was able to
resurrect the god.
But then Set himself
found the body once again
and chopped it up into
14 parts, and those parts
were sprinkled throughout
the whole of Egypt.
>> And here, the plot thickens.
Experts point out that
something mysterious
has been hidden in this story--
something that took
place at Abydos.
Experts point to a mystical
system which holds the key.
>> Gematria is a Hebrew mystical
system of being able to break
down words into individual
characters which are assigned
a specific numerical value.
And when these values
are brought together,
it creates a total,
a number that
has a mystical significance.
And it would seem as if this
is something which was also
found in Greek tradition
as well and became
associated with
the cult of Osiris.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Osiris's death is encoded
in numbers in the Egyptian
funerary text similar to
Gematria in the Kabbalah.
Osiris's body was
cut into 14 pieces.
Jesus, who was also
crucified, made 14 stops
along the way of the cross.
Osiris was murdered
by 72 assassins.
This is a reoccurring
number in many traditions--
the 72 names of God, the 72
languages spoken at Babel,
the 72 Archons in Gnosticism.
It is a symbolic number
that is intimately
linked to both the ancient
and New Testaments,
and particularly the
story of Jesus Christ.
>> Could one of the greatest
stories of death and rebirth
have symbolism with
this story of Osiris?
>> The lifetime of Osiris
represents one of the greatest
mysteries in Egyptian mythology
as well as world mythology,
because there are so many
parallels between the life
of Osiris and the life of the
later icons and later mystics
and later saints, including
Jesus of Nazareth.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> The death of Osiris in
Egyptian culture was obscured
for a long time.
It was unbearable for
the ancient Egyptians.
To explain his death, they
coded it into the funerary text.
There isn't a single text that
explains the event clearly,
although you can find it
in bits and pieces in all
the funerary texts.
It is nonetheless coded
into all the funerary texts.
The element of the
story that stands out
is that over 10,000
years ago, when
war raged in the Atlantean
Islands and the planet
between Mars and
Jupiter exploded,
Osiris was at Abydos
with his entourage.
They were all massacred.
It isn't clear what
exactly happened,
but there must have been
traders on Osiris's side
who opened access
to the Abydos site.
Osiris was dragged,
half-drowned in the Nile that
flows at Abydos,
and tied to a tree,
crucified, and disemboweled.
It is even said in certain
texts that his heart was
ripped out and devoured by Set.
A civilizing God who is
tied to a tree and crucified
is reminiscent of certain
New Testament passages.
The Egyptian funerary
texts are quite clear
regarding the place where
Osiris was murdered.
It is explicitly said
that it was Abydos.
A small channel runs
through the Abydos
known in Egyptian as
Nedit-- the place where
the father was bound.
Once more, we encounter
the idea of Osiris being
attached to a tree at Abydos.
As I mentioned earlier, the
Sumerian tablet B.M 100,046
speaks of the son of life
being attached to a tree
and sacrificed by a cruel demon.
His body is recovered
by his two sisters
and is resurrected thanks to
Ereshkigal, the queen of Kigal,
the underground beneath Giza.
Osiris died at
Abydos because that
was where he lived and taught.
It is symbolic because it
is the place where he taught
humanity the secrets of tools.
This idea can also be found
in tablet B.M. 100,046, where
it is said that
the son of life was
criticized for
teaching the people
about the tree of knowledge.
>> If Osiris/Enki died here
at this ancient site of Abydos
10,000 years ago crucified,
could it be that this message
was a turning point in humanity?
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> The death of Osiris around
10,000 BC represents a turning
point in history.
The Egyptian funerary texts
that speak of his death
date back to 2500 BC.
The time lag between his death
and the texts that speak of it
is at least 8,000 years.
This was a civilizing God
who, similar to Jesus Christ,
offered teachings and was
massacred because his message
was disliked.
His message has lived
on over millennia.
Abydos was a landmark
for millennia.
People from the Near East, Far
East, and the Mediterranean
came to mourn his
passing at his tomb.
This went on for a millennia.
It's unfathomable.
It's difficult
for us to imagine,
because our reference point is
Jesus Christ 2,000 years ago.
We are talking about 8,000
or 10,000 years ago here.
It's monumental.
His message has lived on and can
still be found in texts today.
We find the same story
in different myths,
be they Sumerian, Akkadian,
Egyptian, or African.
Traces of Osiris echo in Dogon
mythology with the sacrifice
of Nommo on a tree.
The evil coyote, Pale Fox,
who is determined to kill him
represents Set, or Enlil.
The story is archetypical
and cyclical.
Following Osiris's death, the
chronicles of Horus begin.
He is said to be the
reincarnation of Osiris.
The texts explain that Isis
extracted Osiris's genes
and gave birth to Horus.
He followed a similar
trajectory as his father,
although he was much
more of a warrior
and set out to
battle Set's forces.
It is an archetypical story,
including that of Jesus,
that repeats itself until
the message is heard.
Is humanity capable
of receiving it?
>> So why exactly is the
death of Osiris and the legend
surrounding it so important--
so important to us, but also
important to the Dynastic
Egyptians?
And the answer
appears to be simple.
It's about the whole concept
of death and resurrection,
not just of us human
beings, but of nature
and of the cycles of
the sun each year.
All of these were these
death and rebirth gods
that would hammer
home this whole idea
of the importance of
death and the resurrection
in the afterlife.
And of course, that also
brings us to Christianity.
We have similar ideas
with the death of Jesus
and his resurrection
after three days,
because very clearly, the whole
early cult of Christianity
borrowed a lot of its ideas
from pre-existing pagan gods who
existed in the area
of the Near East
prior to the first century AD.
And all of these just
tell us how important
it is that when we die,
we will be resurrected.
>> The story of Enki and Osiris
and possibly even Jesus is
of a great man that teaches
humans how to understand
the universe and their
connections with God.
Is it possible these teachings
keep coming to us until we
understand their true meaning?
>> We have to understand
something about ourselves that
pushes the boundaries of
our limits and allows us
to understand what
we're being shown.
Osiris may represent
that from a time
that predates Christianity.
My sense is from
my Egyptian guides,
from the Bedouins
that I've worked with
and their mystical traditions,
from the stories that
were handed down
from father to son
in the lineage of
the Egyptian guides
is that the Osireion is the
hall of records, if you will,
for the Osireion wisdom.
This is where the
information is stored.
>> Osiris represented the
experiences of the universe,
the process of acknowledging,
the process of living,
of learning about life.
And this was the idea
that the Atlantean people
had about the representative
of the families in the culture,
that humans were
trying to represent
the concept of the universe.
So it's not that he and
the other ones were gods,
but they were people
that were trying
to incarnate the
concept of the cosmos
so they could teach others
how the cosmos works.
So he was the representation of
the experience of the universe.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> We need to fight
for our freedom.
It's always the same story.
It's relevant to what the world
is currently going through.
We all need to fight
for our freedom.
It was fought for in the
past by humans, non-humans,
superhumans, and gods.
The myths and texts are
clear that they fought
for the freedom of humanity.
We can't forget this, and we
need to continue the fight.
It's important to protect
individual freedom.
>> Buried beneath the dirt of
this ancient city of Abydos
lies not only the subterranean
temple of the Osireion,
but a legend of a man that came
from the islands off the coast
of Africa and built his place of
refuge so he could teach humans
about the universe.
Here, for thousands
of years, the story
has been told and
retold, and quite
possibly, we have adapted this
story into our modern lives.
Stories, religions,
and codes all lead back
to this main teaching.
Could it be that
deep down, we all
remember that we
are the universe
and we are more powerful
than we can even imagine?